1.1 A revealing of Jesus, the Messiah. God gave it to make plain to his servants what is about to happen. He published and delivered it by Angel to his servant John.
1.2 And John told everything he saw: God's Word - the witness of Jesus Christ!
1.3 How blessed the reader! How blessed the hearers and keepers of these oracle words, all the words written in this book! Time is just about up. His Eyes Pouring Fire-Blaze
1.4 I, John, am writing this to the seven churches in Asia province: All the best to you from The God Who Is, The God Who Was, and The God About to Arrive, and from the Seven Spirits assembled before his throne,
1.5 and from Jesus Christ - Loyal Witness, Firstborn from the dead, Ruler of all earthly kings. Glory and strength to Christ, who loves us, who blood-washed our sins from our lives,
1.6 Who made us a Kingdom, Priests for his Father, forever - and yes, he's on his way!
1.7 Riding the clouds, he'll be seen by every eye, those who mocked and killed him will see him, People from all nations and all times will tear their clothes in lament. Oh, Yes.
1.8 The Master declares, "I'm A to Z. I'm The God Who Is, The God Who Was, and The God About to Arrive. I'm the Sovereign-Strong."
1.9 I, John, with you all the way in the trial and the Kingdom and the passion of patience in Jesus, was on the island called Patmos because of God's Word, the witness of Jesus.
1.10 It was Sunday and I was in the Spirit, praying. I heard a loud voice behind me, trumpet-clear and piercing:
1.11 "Write what you see into a book. Send it to the seven churches: to Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamum, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia, Laodicea."
1.12 I turned and saw the voice. I saw a gold menorah with seven branches,
1.13 And in the center, the Son of Man, in a robe and gold breastplate,
1.14 hair a blizzard of white, Eyes pouring fire-blaze,
1.15 both feet furnace-fired bronze, His voice a cataract,
1.16 right hand holding the Seven Stars, His mouth a sharp-biting sword, his face a perigee sun.
1.17 I saw this and fainted dead at his feet. His right hand pulled me upright, his voice reassured me:
1.18 I'm Alive. I died, but I came to life, and my life is now forever. See these keys in my hand? They open and lock Death's doors, they open and lock Hell's gates.
1.19 Now write down everything you see: things that are, things about to be.
1.20 The Seven Stars you saw in my right hand and the seven-branched gold menorah - do you want to know what's behind them? The Seven Stars are the Angels of the seven churches; the menorah's seven branches are the seven churches."
2.1 Write this to Ephesus, to the Angel of the church. The One with Seven Stars in his right-fist grip, striding through the golden seven-lights' circle, speaks:
2.2 "I see what you've done, your hard, hard work, your refusal to quit. I know you can't stomach evil, that you weed out apostolic pretenders.
2.3 I know your persistence, your courage in my cause, that you never wear out.
2.4 "But you walked away from your first love - why? What's going on with you, anyway?
2.5 Do you have any idea how far you've fallen? A Lucifer fall! "Turn back! Recover your dear early love. No time to waste, for I'm well on my way to removing your light from the golden circle.
2.6 "You do have this to your credit: You hate the Nicolaitan business. I hate it, too.
2.7 "Are your ears awake? Listen. Listen to the Wind Words, the Spirit blowing through the churches. I'm about to call each conqueror to dinner. I'm spreading a banquet of Tree-of-Life fruit, a supper plucked from God's orchard."
2.8 Write this to Smyrna, to the Angel of the church. The Beginning and Ending, the First and Final One, the Once Dead and Then Come Alive, speaks:
2.9 "I can see your pain and poverty - constant pain, dire poverty - but I also see your wealth. And I hear the lie in the claims of those who pretend to be good Jews, who in fact belong to Satan's crowd.
2.10 "Fear nothing in the things you're about to suffer - but stay on guard! Fear nothing! The Devil is about to throw you in jail for a time of testing - ten days. It won't last forever. "Don't quit, even if it costs you your life. Stay there believing. I have a Life-Crown sized and ready for you.
2.11 "Are your ears awake? Listen. Listen to the Wind Words, the Spirit blowing through the churches. Christ-conquerors are safe from Devil-death."
2.12 Write this to Pergamum, to the Angel of the church. The One with the sharp-biting sword draws from the sheath of his mouth - out come the sword words:
2.13 "I see where you live, right under the shadow of Satan's throne. But you continue boldly in my Name; you never once denied my Name, even when the pressure was worst, when they martyred Antipas, my witness who stayed faithful to me on Satan's turf.
2.14 "But why do you indulge that Balaam crowd? Don't you remember that Balaam was an enemy agent, seducing Balak and sabotaging Israel's holy pilgrimage by throwing unholy parties?
2.15 And why do you put up with the Nicolaitans, who do the same thing?
2.16 "Enough! Don't give in to them; I'll be with you soon. I'm fed up and about to cut them to pieces with my sword-sharp words.
2.17 "Are your ears awake? Listen. Listen to the Wind Words, the Spirit blowing through the churches. I'll give the sacred manna to every conqueror; I'll also give a clear, smooth stone inscribed with your new name, your secret new name."
2.18 Write this to Thyatira, to the Angel of the church. God's Son, eyes pouring fire-blaze, standing on feet of furnace-fired bronze, says this:
2.19 "I see everything you're doing for me. Impressive! The love and the faith, the service and persistence. Yes, very impressive! You get better at it every day.
2.20 "But why do you let that Jezebel who calls herself a prophet mislead my dear servants into Cross-denying, self-indulging religion?
2.21 I gave her a chance to change her ways, but she has no intention of giving up a career in the god-business.
2.22 I'm about to lay her low, along with her partners, as they play their sex-and-religion games.
2.23 The bastard offspring of their idol-whoring I'll kill. Then every church will know that appearances don't impress me. I x-ray every motive and make sure you get what's coming to you.
2.24 "The rest of you Thyatirans, who have nothing to do with this outrage, who scorn this playing around with the Devil that gets paraded as profundity, be assured I'll not make life any harder for you than it already is.
2.25 Hold on to the truth you have until I get there.
2.26 "Here's the reward I have for every conqueror, everyone who keeps at it, refusing to give up: You'll rule the nations,
2.27 your Shepherd-King rule as firm as an iron staff, their resistance fragile as clay pots. This was the gift my Father gave me; I pass it along to you -
2.28 and with it, the Morning Star!
2.29 "Are your ears awake? Listen. Listen to the Wind Words, the Spirit blowing through the churches."
3.1 Write this to Sardis, to the Angel of the church. The One holding the Seven Spirits of God in one hand, a firm grip on the Seven Stars with the other, speaks: "I see right through your work. You have a reputation for vigor and zest, but you're dead, stone dead.
3.2 "Up on your feet! Take a deep breath! Maybe there's life in you yet. But I wouldn't know it by looking at your busywork; nothing of God's work has been completed. Your condition is desperate.
3.3 Think of the gift you once had in your hands, the Message you heard with your ears - grasp it again and turn back to God. "If you pull the covers back over your head and sleep on, oblivious to God, I'll return when you least expect it, break into your life like a thief in the night.
3.4 "You still have a few Christians in Sardis who haven't ruined themselves wallowing in the muck of the world's ways. They'll walk with me on parade! They've proved their worth!
3.5 "Conquerors will march in the victory parade, their names indelible in the Book of Life. I'll lead them up and present them by name to my Father and his Angels.
3.6 "Are your ears awake? Listen. Listen to the Wind Words, the Spirit blowing through the churches."
3.7 Write this to Philadelphia, to the Angel of the church. The Holy, the True - David's key in his hand, opening doors no one can lock, locking doors no one can open - speaks:
3.8 "I see what you've done. Now see what I've done. I've opened a door before you that no one can slam shut. You don't have much strength, I know that; you used what you had to keep my Word. You didn't deny me when times were rough.
3.9 "And watch as I take those who call themselves true believers but are nothing of the kind, pretenders whose true membership is in the club of Satan - watch as I strip off their pretensions and they're forced to acknowledge it's you that I've loved.
3.10 "Because you kept my Word in passionate patience, I'll keep you safe in the time of testing that will be here soon, and all over the earth, every man, woman, and child put to the test.
3.11 "I'm on my way; I'll be there soon. Keep a tight grip on what you have so no one distracts you and steals your crown.
3.12 "I'll make each conqueror a pillar in the sanctuary of my God, a permanent position of honor. Then I'll write names on you, the pillars: the Name of my God, the Name of God's City - the new Jerusalem coming down out of Heaven - and my new Name.
3.13 "Are your ears awake? Listen. Listen to the Wind Words, the Spirit blowing through the churches."
3.14 Write to Laodicea, to the Angel of the church. God's Yes, the Faithful and Accurate Witness, the First of God's creation, says:
3.15 "I know you inside and out, and find little to my liking. You're not cold, you're not hot - far better to be either cold or hot!
3.16 You're stale. You're stagnant. You make me want to vomit.
3.17 You brag, 'I'm rich, I've got it made, I need nothing from anyone,' oblivious that in fact you're a pitiful, blind beggar, threadbare and homeless.
3.18 "Here's what I want you to do: Buy your gold from me, gold that's been through the refiner's fire. Then you'll be rich. Buy your clothes from me, clothes designed in Heaven. You've gone around half-naked long enough. And buy medicine for your eyes from me so you can see, really see.
3.19 "The people I love, I call to account - prod and correct and guide so that they'll live at their best. Up on your feet, then! About face! Run after God!
3.20 "Look at me. I stand at the door. I knock. If you hear me call and open the door, I'll come right in and sit down to supper with you.
3.21 Conquerors will sit alongside me at the head table, just as I, having conquered, took the place of honor at the side of my Father. That's my gift to the conquerors!
3.22 "Are your ears awake? Listen. Listen to the Wind Words, the Spirit blowing through the churches."
4.1 Then I looked, and, oh! - a door open into Heaven. The trumpet-voice, the first voice in my vision, called out, "Ascend and enter. I'll show you what happens next."
4.2 I was caught up at once in deep worship and, oh! - a Throne set in Heaven with One Seated on the Throne,
4.3 suffused in gem hues of amber and flame with a nimbus of emerald.
4.4 Twenty-four thrones circled the Throne, with Twenty-four Elders seated, white-robed, gold-crowned.
4.5 Lightning flash and thunder crash pulsed from the Throne. Seven fire-blazing torches fronted the Throne (these are the Sevenfold Spirit of God).
4.6 Before the Throne it was like a clear crystal sea.
4.7 The first Animal like a lion, the second like an ox, the third with a human face, the fourth like an eagle in flight.
4.8 The Four Animals were winged, each with six wings. They were all eyes, seeing around and within. And they chanted night and day, never taking a break: Holy, holy, holy Is God our Master, Sovereign-Strong, The Was, The Is, The Coming.
4.9 Every time the Animals gave glory and honor and thanks to the One Seated on the Throne - the age-after-age Living One -
4.10 the Twenty-four Elders would fall prostrate before the One Seated on the Throne. They worshiped the age-after-age Living One. They threw their crowns at the foot of the Throne, chanting,
4.11 Worthy, O Master! Yes, our God! Take the glory! the honor! the power! You created it all; It was created because you wanted it.
5.1 I saw a scroll in the right hand of the One Seated on the Throne. It was written on both sides, fastened with seven seals.
5.2 I also saw a powerful Angel, calling out in a voice like thunder, "Is there anyone who can open the scroll, who can break its seals?"
5.3 There was no one - no one in Heaven, no one on earth, no one from the underworld - able to break open the scroll and read it.
5.4 I wept and wept and wept that no one was found able to open the scroll, able to read it.
5.5 One of the Elders said, "Don't weep. Look - the Lion from Tribe Judah, the Root of David's Tree, has conquered. He can open the scroll, can rip through the seven seals."
5.6 So I looked, and there, surrounded by Throne, Animals, and Elders, was a Lamb, slaughtered but standing tall. Seven horns he had, and seven eyes, the Seven Spirits of God sent into all the earth.
5.7 He came to the One Seated on the Throne and took the scroll from his right hand.
5.8 The moment he took the scroll, the Four Animals and Twenty-four Elders fell down and worshiped the Lamb. Each had a harp and each had a bowl, a gold bowl filled with incense, the prayers of God's holy people.
5.9 And they sang a new song: Worthy! Take the scroll, open its seals. Slain! Paying in blood, you bought men and women, Bought them back from all over the earth, Bought them back for God.
5.10 Then you made them a Kingdom, Priests for our God, Priest-kings to rule over the earth.
5.11 I looked again. I heard a company of Angels around the Throne, the Animals, and the Elders - ten thousand times ten thousand their number, thousand after thousand after thousand
5.12 in full song: The slain Lamb is worthy! Take the power, the wealth, the wisdom, the strength! Take the honor, the glory, the blessing!
5.13 Then I heard every creature in Heaven and earth, in underworld and sea, join in, all voices in all places, singing: To the One on the Throne! To the Lamb! The blessing, the honor, the glory, the strength, For age after age after age.
5.14 The Four Animals called out, "Oh, Yes!" The Elders fell to their knees and worshiped.
6.1 I watched while the Lamb ripped off the first of the seven seals. I heard one of the Animals roar, "Come out!"
6.2 I looked - I saw a white horse. Its rider carried a bow and was given a victory garland. He rode off victorious, conquering right and left.
6.3 When the Lamb ripped off the second seal, I heard the second Animal cry, "Come out!"
6.4 Another horse appeared, this one red. Its rider was off to take peace from the earth, setting people at each other's throats, killing one another. He was given a huge sword.
6.5 When he ripped off the third seal, I heard the third Animal cry, "Come out!" I looked. A black horse this time. Its rider carried a set of scales in his hand.
6.6 I heard a message (it seemed to issue from the Four Animals): "A quart of wheat for a day's wages, or three quarts of barley, but all the oil and wine you want."
6.7 When he ripped off the fourth seal, I heard the fourth Animal cry, "Come out!"
6.8 I looked. A colorless horse, sickly pale. Its rider was Death, and Hell was close on its heels. They were given power to destroy a fourth of the earth by war, famine, disease, and wild beasts.
6.9 When he ripped off the fifth seal, I saw the souls of those killed because they had held firm in their witness to the Word of God. They were gathered under the Altar,
6.10 and cried out in loud prayers, "How long, Strong God, Holy and True? How long before you step in and avenge our murders?"
6.11 Then each martyr was given a white robe and told to sit back and wait until the full number of martyrs was filled from among their servant companions and friends in the faith.
6.12 I watched while he ripped off the sixth seal: a bone-jarring earthquake, sun turned black as ink, moon all bloody,
6.13 stars falling out of the sky like figs shaken from a tree in a high wind,
6.14 sky snapped shut like a book, islands and mountains sliding this way and that.
6.15 And then pandemonium, everyone and his dog running for cover - kings, princes, generals, rich and strong, along with every commoner, slave or free. They hid in mountain caves and rocky dens,
6.16 calling out to mountains and rocks, "Refuge! Hide us from the One Seated on the Throne and the wrath of the Lamb!
6.17 The great Day of their wrath has come - who can stand it?"
7.1 Immediately I saw Four Angels standing at the four corners of earth, standing steady with a firm grip on the four winds so no wind would blow on earth or sea, not even rustle a tree.
7.2 Then I saw another Angel rising from where the sun rose, carrying the seal of the Living God. He thundered to the Four Angels assigned the task of hurting earth and sea,
7.3 "Don't hurt the earth! Don't hurt the sea! Don't so much as hurt a tree until I've sealed the servants of our God on their foreheads!"
7.4 I heard the count of those who were sealed: 144,000! They were sealed out of every Tribe of Israel:
7.5 12,000 sealed from Judah, 12,000 from Reuben, 12,000 from Gad,
7.6 12,000 from Asher, 12,000 from Naphtali, 12,000 from Manasseh,
7.7 12,000 from Simeon, 12,000 from Levi, 12,000 from Issachar,
7.8 12,000 from Zebulun, 12,000 from Joseph, 12,000 sealed from Benjamin.
7.9 I looked again. I saw a huge crowd, too huge to count. Everyone was there - all nations and tribes, all races and languages. And they were standing, dressed in white robes and waving palm branches, standing before the Throne and the Lamb
7.10 and heartily singing: Salvation to our God on his Throne! Salvation to the Lamb!
7.11 All who were standing around the Throne - Angels, Elders, Animals - fell on their faces before the Throne and worshiped God,
7.12 singing: Oh, Yes! The blessing and glory and wisdom and thanksgiving, The honor and power and strength, To our God forever and ever and ever! Oh, Yes!
7.13 Just then one of the Elders addressed me: "Who are these dressed in white robes, and where did they come from?"
7.14 Taken aback, I said, "O Sir, I have no idea - but you must know."
7.15 That's why they're standing before God's Throne. They serve him day and night in his Temple. The One on the Throne will pitch his tent there for them:
7.16 no more hunger, no more thirst, no more scorching heat.
7.17 The Lamb on the Throne will shepherd them, will lead them to spring waters of Life. And God will wipe every last tear from their eyes."
8.1 When the Lamb ripped off the seventh seal, Heaven fell quiet - complete silence for about half an hour.
8.2 I saw the Seven Angels who are always in readiness before God handed seven trumpets.
8.3 Then another Angel, carrying a gold censer, came and stood at the Altar. He was given a great quantity of incense so that he could offer up the prayers of all the holy people of God on the Golden Altar before the Throne.
8.4 Smoke billowed up from the incense-laced prayers of the holy ones, rose before God from the hand of the Angel.
8.5 Then the Angel filled the censer with fire from the Altar and heaved it to earth. It set off thunders, voices, lightnings, and an earthquake.
8.6 The Seven Angels with the trumpets got ready to blow them.
8.7 At the first trumpet blast, hail and fire mixed with blood were dumped on earth. A third of the earth was scorched, a third of the trees, and every blade of green grass - burned to a crisp.
8.8 The second Angel trumpeted. Something like a huge mountain blazing with fire was flung into the sea. A third of the sea turned to blood,
8.9 a third of the living sea creatures died, and a third of the ships sank.
8.10 The third Angel trumpeted. A huge Star, blazing like a torch, fell from Heaven, wiping out a third of the rivers and a third of the springs.
8.11 The Star's name was Wormwood. A third of the water turned bitter, and many people died from the poisoned water.
8.12 The fourth Angel trumpeted. A third of the sun, a third of the moon, and a third of the stars were hit, blacked out by a third, both day and night in one-third blackout.
8.13 I looked hard; I heard a lone eagle, flying through Middle-Heaven, crying out ominously, "Doom! Doom! Doom to everyone left on earth! There are three more Angels about to blow their trumpets. Doom is on its way!"
9.1 The fifth Angel trumpeted. I saw a Star plummet from Heaven to earth. The Star was handed a key to the Well of the Abyss.
9.2 He unlocked the Well of the Abyss - smoke poured out of the Well, billows and billows of smoke, sun and air in blackout from smoke pouring out of the Well.
9.3 Then out of the smoke crawled locusts with the venom of scorpions.
9.4 They were given their orders: "Don't hurt the grass, don't hurt anything green, don't hurt a single tree - only men and women, and then only those who lack the seal of God on their foreheads."
9.5 They were ordered to torture but not kill, torture them for five months, the pain like a scorpion sting.
9.6 When this happens, people are going to prefer death to torture, look for ways to kill themselves. But they won't find a way - death will have gone into hiding.
9.7 The locusts looked like horses ready for war. They had gold crowns, human faces,
9.8 women's hair, the teeth of lions,
9.9 and iron breastplates. The sound of their wings was the sound of horse-drawn chariots charging into battle.
9.10 Their tails were equipped with stings, like scorpion tails. With those tails they were ordered to torture the human race for five months.
9.11 They had a king over them, the Angel of the Abyss. His name in Hebrew is Abaddon, in Greek, Apollyon - "Destroyer."
9.12 The first doom is past. Two dooms yet to come.
9.13 The sixth Angel trumpeted. I heard a voice speaking to the sixth Angel from the horns of the Golden Altar before God:
9.14 "Let the Four Angels loose, the Angels confined at the great River Euphrates."
9.15 The Four Angels were untied and let loose, Four Angels all prepared for the exact year, month, day, and even hour when they were to kill a third of the human race.
9.16 The number of the army of horsemen was twice ten thousand times ten thousand. I heard the count
9.17 and saw both horses and riders in my vision: fiery breastplates on the riders, lion heads on the horses breathing out fire and smoke and brimstone.
9.18 With these three weapons - fire and smoke and brimstone - they killed a third of the human race.
9.19 The horses killed with their mouths and tails; their serpentlike tails also had heads that wreaked havoc.
9.20 The remaining men and women who weren't killed by these weapons went on their merry way - didn't change their way of life, didn't quit worshiping demons, didn't quit centering their lives around lumps of gold and silver and brass, hunks of stone and wood that couldn't see or hear or move.
9.21 There wasn't a sign of a change of heart. They plunged right on in their murderous, occult, promiscuous, and thieving ways.
10.1 I saw another powerful Angel coming down out of Heaven wrapped in a cloud. There was a rainbow over his head, his face was sun-radiant, his legs pillars of fire.
10.2 He had a small book open in his hand. He placed his right foot on the sea and his left foot on land,
10.3 then called out thunderously, a lion roar. When he called out, the Seven Thunders called back.
10.4 When the Seven Thunders spoke, I started to write it all down, but a voice out of Heaven stopped me, saying, "Seal with silence the Seven Thunders; don't write a word."
10.5 Then the Angel I saw astride sea and land lifted his right hand to Heaven
10.6 and swore by the One Living Forever and Ever, who created Heaven and everything in it, earth and everything in it, sea and everything in it, that time was up -
10.7 that when the seventh Angel blew his trumpet, which he was about to do, the Mystery of God, all the plans he had revealed to his servants, the prophets, would be completed.
10.8 The voice out of Heaven spoke to me again: "Go, take the book held open in the hand of the Angel astride sea and earth."
10.9 I went up to the Angel and said, "Give me the little book." He said, "Take it, then eat it. It will taste sweet like honey, but turn sour in your stomach."
10.10 I took the little book from the Angel's hand and it was sweet honey in my mouth, but when I swallowed, my stomach curdled.
10.11 Then I was told, "You must go back and prophesy again over many peoples and nations and languages and kings."
11.1 I was given a stick for a measuring rod and told, "Get up and measure God's Temple and Altar and everyone worshiping in it.
11.2 Exclude the outside court; don't measure it. It's been handed over to non-Jewish outsiders. They'll desecrate the Holy City for forty-two months.
11.3 "Meanwhile, I'll provide my two Witnesses. Dressed in sackcloth, they'll prophesy for one thousand two hundred sixty days.
11.4 These are the two Olive Trees, the two Lampstands, standing at attention before God on earth.
11.5 If anyone tries to hurt them, a blast of fire from their mouths will incinerate them - burn them to a crisp just like that.
11.6 They'll have power to seal the sky so that it doesn't rain for the time of their prophesying, power to turn rivers and springs to blood, power to hit earth with any and every disaster as often as they want.
11.7 "When they've completed their witness, the Beast from the Abyss will emerge and fight them, conquer and kill them,
11.8 leaving their corpses exposed on the street of the Great City spiritually called Sodom and Egypt, the same City where their Master was crucified.
11.9 For three and a half days they'll be there - exposed, prevented from getting a decent burial, stared at by the curious from all over the world.
11.10 Those people will cheer at the spectacle, shouting 'Good riddance!' and calling for a celebration, for these two prophets pricked the conscience of all the people on earth, made it impossible for them to enjoy their sins.
11.11 "Then, after three and a half days, the Living Spirit of God will enter them - they're on their feet! - and all those gloating spectators will be scared to death."
11.12 I heard a strong voice out of Heaven calling, "Come up here!" and up they went to Heaven, wrapped in a cloud, their enemies watching it all.
11.13 At that moment there was a gigantic earthquake - a tenth of the city fell to ruin, seven thousand perished in the earthquake, the rest frightened to the core of their being, frightened into giving honor to the God of Heaven.
11.14 The second doom is past, the third doom coming right on its heels.
11.15 The seventh Angel trumpeted. A crescendo of voices in Heaven sang out, The kingdom of the world is now the Kingdom of our God and his Messiah! He will rule forever and ever!
11.16 The Twenty-four Elders seated before God on their thrones fell to their knees, worshiped,
11.17 and sang, We thank you, O God, Sovereign-Strong, Who Is and Who Was. You took your great power and took over - reigned!
11.18 The angry nations now get a taste of your anger. The time has come to judge the dead, to reward your servants, all prophets and saints, Reward small and great who fear your Name, and destroy the destroyers of earth.
11.19 The doors of God's Temple in Heaven flew open, and the Ark of his Covenant was clearly seen surrounded by flashes of lightning, loud shouts, peals of thunder, an earthquake, and a fierce hailstorm.
12.1 A great Sign appeared in Heaven: a Woman dressed all in sunlight, standing on the moon, and crowned with Twelve Stars.
12.2 She was giving birth to a Child and cried out in the pain of childbirth.
12.3 And then another Sign alongside the first: a huge and fiery Dragon! It had seven heads and ten horns, a crown on each of the seven heads.
12.4 With one flick of its tail it knocked a third of the Stars from the sky and dumped them on earth. The Dragon crouched before the Woman in childbirth, poised to eat up the Child when it came.
12.5 The Woman gave birth to a Son who will shepherd all nations with an iron rod. Her Son was seized and placed safely before God on his Throne.
12.6 The Woman herself escaped to the desert to a place of safety prepared by God, all comforts provided her for one thousand two hundred and sixty days.
12.7 War broke out in Heaven. Michael and his Angels fought the Dragon. The Dragon and his Angels fought back,
12.8 but were no match for Michael. They were cleared out of Heaven, not a sign of them left.
12.9 The great Dragon - ancient Serpent, the one called Devil and Satan, the one who led the whole earth astray - thrown out, and all his Angels thrown out with him, thrown down to earth.
12.10 Then I heard a strong voice out of Heaven saying, Salvation and power are established! Kingdom of our God, authority of his Messiah! The Accuser of our brothers and sisters thrown out, who accused them day and night before God.
12.11 They defeated him through the blood of the Lamb and the bold word of their witness. They weren't in love with themselves; they were willing to die for Christ.
12.12 So rejoice, O Heavens, and all who live there, but doom to earth and sea, For the Devil's come down on you with both feet; he's had a great fall; He's wild and raging with anger; he hasn't much time and he knows it.
12.13 When the Dragon saw he'd been thrown to earth, he went after the Woman who had given birth to the Man-Child.
12.14 The Woman was given wings of a great eagle to fly to a place in the desert to be kept in safety and comfort for a time and times and half a time, safe and sound from the Serpent.
12.15 The Serpent vomited a river of water to swamp and drown her,
12.16 but earth came to her help, swallowing the water the Dragon spewed from its mouth.
12.17 Helpless with rage, the Dragon raged at the Woman, then went off to make war with the rest of her children, the children who keep God's commands and hold firm to the witness of Jesus.
13.1 And the Dragon stood on the shore of the sea. I saw a Beast rising from the sea. It had ten horns and seven heads - on each horn a crown, and each head inscribed with a blasphemous name.
13.2 The Beast I saw looked like a leopard with bear paws and a lion's mouth. The Dragon turned over its power to it, its throne and great authority.
13.3 One of the Beast's heads looked as if it had been struck a deathblow, and then healed. The whole earth was agog, gaping at the Beast.
13.4 They worshiped the Dragon who gave the Beast authority, and they worshiped the Beast, exclaiming, "There's never been anything like the Beast! No one would dare go to war with the Beast!"
13.5 The Beast had a loud mouth, boastful and blasphemous. It could do anything it wanted for forty-two months.
13.6 It yelled blasphemies against God, blasphemed his Name, blasphemed his Church, especially those already dwelling with God in Heaven.
13.7 It was permitted to make war on God's holy people and conquer them. It held absolute sway over all tribes and peoples, tongues and races.
13.8 Everyone on earth whose name was not written from the world's foundation in the slaughtered Lamb's Book of Life will worship the Beast.
13.9 Are you listening to this?
13.10 They've made their bed; now they must lie in it. Anyone marked for prison goes straight to prison; anyone pulling a sword goes down by the sword. Meanwhile, God's holy people passionately and faithfully stand their ground.
13.11 I saw another Beast rising out of the ground. It had two horns like a lamb but sounded like a dragon when it spoke.
13.12 It was a puppet of the first Beast, made earth and everyone in it worship the first Beast, which had been healed of its deathblow.
13.13 This second Beast worked magical signs, dazzling people by making fire come down from Heaven.
13.14 It used the magic it got from the Beast to dupe earth dwellers, getting them to make an image of the Beast that received the deathblow and lived.
13.15 It was able to animate the image of the Beast so that it talked, and then arrange that anyone not worshiping the Beast would be killed.
13.16 It forced all people, small and great, rich and poor, free and slave, to have a mark on the right hand or forehead.
13.17 Without the mark of the name of the Beast or the number of its name, it was impossible to buy or sell anything.
13.18 Solve a riddle: Put your heads together and figure out the meaning of the number of the Beast. It's a human number: six hundred sixty-six.
14.1 I saw - it took my breath away! - the Lamb standing on Mount Zion, One Hundred and Forty-four Thousand standing there with him, his Name and the Name of his Father inscribed on their foreheads.
14.2 And I heard a voice out of Heaven, the sound like a cataract, like the crash of thunder.
14.3 and the harpists singing a new song before the Throne and the Four Animals and the Elders. Only the Hundred and Forty-four Thousand could learn to sing the song. They were bought from earth,
14.4 lived without compromise, virgin-fresh before God. Wherever the Lamb went, they followed. They were bought from humankind, firstfruits of the harvest for God and the Lamb.
14.5 Not a false word in their mouths. A perfect offering.
14.6 I saw another Angel soaring in Middle-Heaven. He had an Eternal Message to preach to all who were still on earth, every nation and tribe, every tongue and people.
14.7 He preached in a loud voice, "Fear God and give him glory! His hour of judgment has come! Worship the Maker of Heaven and earth, salt sea and fresh water!"
14.8 A second Angel followed, calling out, "Ruined, ruined, Great Babylon ruined! She made all the nations drunk on the wine of her whoring!"
14.9 A third Angel followed, shouting, warning, "If anyone worships the Beast and its image and takes the mark on forehead or hand,
14.10 that person will drink the wine of God's wrath, prepared unmixed in his chalice of anger, and suffer torment from fire and brimstone in the presence of Holy Angels, in the presence of the Lamb.
14.11 Smoke from their torment will rise age after age. No respite for those who worship the Beast and its image, who take the mark of its name."
14.12 Meanwhile, the saints stand passionately patient, keeping God's commands, staying faithful to Jesus.
14.13 I heard a voice out of Heaven, "Write this: Blessed are those who die in the Master from now on; how blessed to die that way!" "Yes," says the Spirit, "and blessed rest from their hard, hard work. None of what they've done is wasted; God blesses them for it all in the end."
14.14 I looked up, I caught my breath! - a white cloud and one like the Son of Man sitting on it. He wore a gold crown and held a sharp sickle.
14.15 Another Angel came out of the Temple, shouting to the Cloud-Enthroned, "Swing your sickle and reap. It's harvest time. Earth's harvest is ripe for reaping."
14.16 The Cloud-Enthroned gave a mighty sweep of his sickle, began harvesting earth in a stroke.
14.17 Then another Angel came out of the Temple in Heaven. He also had a sharp sickle.
14.18 Yet another Angel, the one in charge of tending the fire, came from the Altar. He thundered to the Angel who held the sharp sickle, "Swing your sharp sickle. Harvest earth's vineyard. The grapes are bursting with ripeness."
14.19 The Angel swung his sickle, harvested earth's vintage, and heaved it into the winepress, the giant winepress of God's wrath.
14.20 The winepress was outside the City. As the vintage was trodden, blood poured from the winepress as high as a horse's bridle, a river of blood for two hundred miles.
15.1 I saw another Sign in Heaven, huge and breathtaking: seven Angels with seven disasters. These are the final disasters, the wrap-up of God's wrath.
15.2 I saw something like a sea made of glass, the glass all shot through with fire. Carrying harps of God, triumphant over the Beast, its image, and the number of its name, the saved ones stood on the sea of glass.
15.3 They sang the Song of Moses, servant of God; they sang the Song of the Lamb: Mighty your acts and marvelous, O God, the Sovereign-Strong! Righteous your ways and true, King of the nations!
15.4 Who can fail to fear you, God, give glory to your Name? Because you and you only are holy, all nations will come and worship you, because they see your judgments are right.
15.5 Then I saw the doors of the Temple, the Tent of Witness in Heaven, open wide.
15.6 The Seven Angels carrying the seven disasters came out of the Temple. They were dressed in clean, bright linen and wore gold vests.
15.7 One of the Four Animals handed the Seven Angels seven gold bowls, brimming with the wrath of God, who lives forever and ever.
15.8 Smoke from God's glory and power poured out of the Temple. No one was permitted to enter the Temple until the seven disasters of the Seven Angels were finished.
16.1 I heard a shout of command from the Temple to the Seven Angels: "Begin! Pour out the seven bowls of God's wrath on earth!"
16.2 The first Angel stepped up and poured his bowl out on earth: Loathsome, stinking sores erupted on all who had taken the mark of the Beast and worshiped its image.
16.3 The second Angel poured his bowl on the sea: The sea coagulated into blood, and everything in it died.
16.4 The third Angel poured his bowl on rivers and springs: The waters turned to blood.
16.5 I heard the Angel of Waters say, Righteous you are, and your judgments are righteous, The Is, The Was, The Holy.
16.6 They poured out the blood of saints and prophets so you've given them blood to drink -  they've gotten what they deserve!
16.7 Just then I heard the Altar chime in, Yes, O God, the Sovereign-Strong! Your judgments are true and just!
16.8 The fourth Angel poured his bowl on the sun: Fire blazed from the sun and scorched men and women.
16.9 Burned and blistered, they cursed God's Name, the God behind these disasters. They refused to repent, refused to honor God.
16.10 The fifth Angel poured his bowl on the throne of the Beast: Its kingdom fell into sudden eclipse. Mad with pain, men and women bit and chewed their tongues,
16.11 cursed the God of Heaven for their torment and sores, and refused to repent and change their ways.
16.12 The sixth Angel poured his bowl on the great Euphrates River: It dried up to nothing. The dry riverbed became a fine roadbed for the kings from the East.
16.13 From the mouths of the Dragon, the Beast, and the False Prophet I saw three foul demons crawl out - they looked like frogs.
16.14 These are demon spirits performing signs. They're after the kings of the whole world to get them gathered for battle on the Great Day of God, the Sovereign-Strong.
16.15 "Keep watch! I come unannounced, like a thief. You're blessed if, awake and dressed, you're ready for me. Too bad if you're found running through the streets, naked and ashamed."
16.16 The frog-demons gathered the kings together at the place called in Hebrew Armageddon.
16.17 The seventh Angel poured his bowl into the air: From the Throne in the Temple came a shout, "Done!"
16.18 followed by lightning flashes and shouts, thunder crashes and a colossal earthquake - a huge and devastating earthquake, never an earthquake like it since time began.
16.19 The Great City split three ways, the cities of the nations toppled to ruin. Great Babylon had to drink the wine of God's raging anger - God remembered to give her the cup!
16.20 Every island fled and not a mountain was to be found.
16.21 Hailstones weighing a ton plummeted, crushing and smashing men and women as they cursed God for the hail, the epic disaster of hail.
17.1 One of the Seven Angels who carried the seven bowls came and invited me, "Come, I'll show you the judgment of the great Whore who sits enthroned over many waters,
17.2 the Whore with whom the kings of the earth have gone whoring, show you the judgment on earth dwellers drunk on her whorish lust."
17.3 In the Spirit he carried me out in the desert. I saw a woman mounted on a Scarlet Beast. Stuffed with blasphemies, the Beast had seven heads and ten horns.
17.4 The woman was dressed in purple and scarlet, festooned with gold and gems and pearls. She held a gold chalice in her hand, brimming with defiling obscenities, her foul fornications.
17.5 A riddle-name was branded on her forehead: great babylon, mother of whores and abominations of the earth.
17.6 I could see that the woman was drunk, drunk on the blood of God's holy people, drunk on the blood of the martyrs of Jesus.
17.7 The Angel said, "Does this surprise you? Let me tell you the riddle of the woman and the Beast she rides, the Beast with seven heads and ten horns.
17.8 The Beast you saw once was, is no longer, and is about to ascend from the Abyss and head straight for Hell. Earth dwellers whose names weren't written in the Book of Life from the foundation of the world will be dazzled when they see the Beast that once was, is no longer, and is to come.
17.9 "But don't drop your guard. Use your head. The seven heads are seven hills; they are where the woman sits.
17.10 They are also seven kings: five dead, one living, the other not yet here - and when he does come his time will be brief.
17.11 The Beast that once was and is no longer is both an eighth and one of the seven - and headed for Hell.
17.12 "The ten horns you saw are ten kings, but they're not yet in power. They will come to power with the Scarlet Beast, but won't last long - a very brief reign.
17.13 These kings will agree to turn over their power and authority to the Beast.
17.14 They will go to war against the Lamb but the Lamb will defeat them, proof that he is Lord over all lords, King over all kings, and those with him will be the called, chosen, and faithful."
17.15 The Angel continued, "The waters you saw on which the Whore was enthroned are peoples and crowds, nations and languages.
17.16 And the ten horns you saw, together with the Beast, will turn on the Whore - they'll hate her, violate her, strip her naked, rip her apart with their teeth, then set fire to her.
17.17 It was God who put the idea in their heads to turn over their rule to the Beast until the words of God are completed.
17.18 The woman you saw is the great city, tyrannizing the kings of the earth."
18.1 Following this I saw another Angel descend from Heaven. His authority was immense, his glory flooded earth with brightness,
18.2 his voice thunderous: Ruined, ruined, Great Babylon, ruined! A ghost town for demons is all that's left! A garrison of carrion spirits, garrison of loathsome, carrion birds.
18.3 All nations drank the wild wine of her whoring; kings of the earth went whoring with her; entrepreneurs made millions exploiting her.
18.4 Just then I heard another shout out of Heaven: Get out, my people, as fast as you can, so you don't get mixed up in her sins, so you don't get caught in her doom.
18.5 Her sins stink to high Heaven; God has remembered every evil she's done.
18.6 Give her back what she's given, double what she's doubled in her works, double the recipe in the cup she mixed;
18.7 Bring her flaunting and wild ways to torment and tears. Because she gloated, "I'm queen over all, and no widow, never a tear on my face,"
18.8 In one day, disasters will crush her -  death, heartbreak, and famine -  Then she'll be burned by fire, because God, the Strong God who judges her, has had enough.
18.9 "The kings of the earth will see the smoke of her burning, and they'll cry and carry on, the kings who went night after night to her brothel.
18.10 They'll keep their distance for fear they'll get burned, and they'll cry their lament: Doom, doom, the great city doomed! City of Babylon, strong city! In one hour it's over, your judgment come!
18.11 "The traders will cry and carry on because the bottom dropped out of business, no more market for their goods:
18.12 gold, silver, precious gems, pearls; fabrics of fine linen, purple, silk, scarlet; perfumed wood and vessels of ivory, precious woods, bronze, iron, and marble;
18.13 cinnamon and spice, incense, myrrh, and frankincense; wine and oil, flour and wheat; cattle, sheep, horses, and chariots. And slaves - their terrible traffic in human lives.
18.14 Everything you've lived for, gone! All delicate and delectable luxury, lost! Not a scrap, not a thread to be found!
18.15 "The traders who made millions off her kept their distance for fear of getting burned, and cried and carried on all the more:
18.16 Doom, doom, the great city doomed! Dressed in the latest fashions, adorned with the finest jewels,
18.17 in one hour such wealth wiped out!
18.18 and cried their lament when they saw the smoke from her burning: 'Oh, what a city! There was never a city like her!'
18.19 They threw dust on their heads and cried as if the world had come to an end: Doom, doom, the great city doomed! All who owned ships or did business by sea Got rich on her getting and spending. And now it's over - wiped out in one hour!
18.20 "O Heaven, celebrate! And join in, saints, apostles, and prophets! God has judged her; every wrong you suffered from her has been judged."
18.21 A strong Angel reached for a boulder - huge, like a millstone - and heaved it into the sea, saying, Heaved and sunk, the great city Babylon, sunk in the sea, not a sign of her ever again.
18.22 Silent the music of harpists and singers -  you'll never hear flutes and trumpets again. Artisans of every kind - gone; you'll never see their likes again. The voice of a millstone grinding falls dumb; you'll never hear that sound again.
18.23 The light from lamps, never again; never again laughter of bride and groom. Her traders robbed the whole earth blind, and by black-magic arts deceived the nations.
18.24 The only thing left of Babylon is blood -  the blood of saints and prophets, the murdered and the martyred.
19.1 I heard a sound like massed choirs in Heaven singing, Hallelujah! The salvation and glory and power are God's -
19.2 his judgments true, his judgments just. He judged the great Whore who corrupted the earth with her lust. He avenged on her the blood of his servants.
19.3 Then, more singing: Hallelujah! The smoke from her burning billows up to high Heaven forever and ever and ever.
19.4 The Twenty-four Elders and the Four Animals fell to their knees and worshiped God on his Throne, praising, Amen! Yes! Hallelujah!
19.5 From the Throne came a shout, a command: Praise our God, all you his servants, All you who fear him, small and great!
19.6 Then I heard the sound of massed choirs, the sound of a mighty cataract, the sound of strong thunder: Hallelujah! The Master reigns, our God, the Sovereign-Strong!
19.7 Let us celebrate, let us rejoice, let us give him the glory! The Marriage of the Lamb has come; his Wife has made herself ready.
19.8 She was given a bridal gown of bright and shining linen. The linen is the righteousness of the saints.
19.9 The Angel said to me, "Write this: 'Blessed are those invited to the Wedding Supper of the Lamb.'" He added, "These are the true words of God!"
19.10 I fell at his feet to worship him, but he wouldn't let me. "Don't do that," he said. "I'm a servant just like you, and like your brothers and sisters who hold to the witness of Jesus. The witness of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy."
19.11 Then I saw Heaven open wide - and oh! a white horse and its Rider. The Rider, named Faithful and True, judges and makes war in pure righteousness.
19.12 His eyes are a blaze of fire, on his head many crowns. He has a Name inscribed that's known only to himself.
19.13 He is dressed in a robe soaked with blood, and he is addressed as "Word of God."
19.14 The armies of Heaven, mounted on white horses and dressed in dazzling white linen, follow him.
19.15 A sharp sword comes out of his mouth so he can subdue the nations, then rule them with a rod of iron. He treads the winepress of the raging wrath of God, the Sovereign-Strong.
19.16 On his robe and thigh is written, King of kings, Lord of lords.
19.17 I saw an Angel standing in the sun, shouting to all flying birds in Middle-Heaven, "Come to the Great Supper of God!
19.18 Feast on the flesh of kings and captains and champions, horses and their riders. Eat your fill of them all - free and slave, small and great!"
19.19 I saw the Beast and, assembled with him, earth's kings and their armies, ready to make war against the One on the horse and his army.
19.20 The Beast was taken, and with him, his puppet, the False Prophet, who used signs to dazzle and deceive those who had taken the mark of the Beast and worshiped his image. They were thrown alive, those two, into Lake Fire and Brimstone.
19.21 The rest were killed by the sword of the One on the horse, the sword that comes from his mouth. All the birds held a feast on their flesh.
20.1 I saw an Angel descending out of Heaven. He carried the key to the Abyss and a chain - a huge chain.
20.2 He grabbed the Dragon, that old Snake - the very Devil, Satan himself! - chained him up for a thousand years,
20.3 dumped him into the Abyss, slammed it shut and sealed it tight. No more trouble out of him, deceiving the nations - until the thousand years are up. After that he has to be let loose briefly.
20.4 I saw thrones. Those put in charge of judgment sat on the thrones. I also saw the souls of those beheaded because of their witness to Jesus and the Word of God, who refused to worship either the Beast or his image, refused to take his mark on forehead or hand - they lived and reigned with Christ for a thousand years!
20.5 The rest of the dead did not live until the thousand years were up. This is the first resurrection -
20.6 and those involved most blessed, most holy. No second death for them! They're priests of God and Christ; they'll reign with him a thousand years.
20.7 When the thousand years are up, Satan will be let loose from his cell,
20.8 and will launch again his old work of deceiving the nations, searching out victims in every nook and cranny of earth, even Gog and Magog! He'll talk them into going to war and will gather a huge army, millions strong.
20.9 They'll stream across the earth, surround and lay siege to the camp of God's holy people, the Beloved City. They'll no sooner get there than fire will pour out of Heaven and burn them up.
20.10 The Devil who deceived them will be hurled into Lake Fire and Brimstone, joining the Beast and False Prophet, the three in torment around the clock for ages without end.
20.11 I saw a Great White Throne and the One Enthroned. Nothing could stand before or against the Presence, nothing in Heaven, nothing on earth.
20.12 And then I saw all the dead, great and small, standing there - before the Throne! And books were opened. Then another book was opened: the Book of Life. The dead were judged by what was written in the books, by the way they had lived.
20.13 Sea released its dead, Death and Hell turned in their dead. Each man and woman was judged by the way he or she had lived.
20.14 Then Death and Hell were hurled into Lake Fire. This is the second death - Lake Fire.
20.15 Anyone whose name was not found inscribed in the Book of Life was hurled into Lake Fire.
21.1 I saw Heaven and earth new-created. Gone the first Heaven, gone the first earth, gone the sea.
21.2 I saw Holy Jerusalem, new-created, descending resplendent out of Heaven, as ready for God as a bride for her husband.
21.3 I heard a voice thunder from the Throne: "Look! Look! God has moved into the neighborhood, making his home with men and women! They're his people, he's their God.
21.4 He'll wipe every tear from their eyes. Death is gone for good - tears gone, crying gone, pain gone - all the first order of things gone."
21.5 The Enthroned continued, "Look! I'm making everything new. Write it all down - each word dependable and accurate."
21.6 Then he said, "It's happened. I'm A to Z. I'm the Beginning, I'm the Conclusion. From Water-of-Life Well I give freely to the thirsty.
21.7 Conquerors inherit all this. I'll be God to them, they'll be sons and daughters to me.
21.8 But for the rest - the feckless and faithless, degenerates and murderers, sex peddlers and sorcerers, idolaters and all liars - for them it's Lake Fire and Brimstone. Second death!"
21.9 One of the Seven Angels who had carried the bowls filled with the seven final disasters spoke to me: "Come here. I'll show you the Bride, the Wife of the Lamb."
21.10 He took me away in the Spirit to an enormous, high mountain and showed me Holy Jerusalem descending out of Heaven from God,
21.11 resplendent in the bright glory of God.
21.12 She had a wall majestic and high with twelve gates. At each gate stood an Angel, and on the gates were inscribed the names of the Twelve Tribes of the sons of Israel:
21.13 three gates on the east, three gates on the north, three gates on the south, three gates on the west.
21.14 The wall was set on twelve foundations, the names of the Twelve Apostles of the Lamb inscribed on them.
21.15 The Angel speaking with me had a gold measuring stick to measure the City, its gates, and its wall.
21.16 The City was laid out in a perfect square. He measured the City with the measuring stick: twelve thousand stadia, its length, width, and height all equal.
21.17 Using the standard measure, the Angel measured the thickness of its wall: 144 cubits.
21.18 The wall was jasper, the color of Glory, and the City was pure gold, translucent as glass.
21.19 The foundations of the City walls were garnished with every precious gem imaginable: the first foundation jasper, the second sapphire, the third agate, the fourth emerald,
21.20 the fifth onyx, the sixth carnelian, the seventh chrysolite, the eighth beryl, the ninth topaz, the tenth chrysoprase, the eleventh jacinth, the twelfth amethyst.
21.21 The twelve gates were twelve pearls, each gate a single pearl.
21.22 But there was no sign of a Temple, for the Lord God - the Sovereign-Strong - and the Lamb are the Temple.
21.23 The City doesn't need sun or moon for light. God's Glory is its light, the Lamb its lamp!
21.24 The nations will walk in its light and earth's kings bring in their splendor.
21.25 Its gates will never be shut by day, and there won't be any night.
21.26 They'll bring the glory and honor of the nations into the City.
21.27 Nothing dirty or defiled will get into the City, and no one who defiles or deceives. Only those whose names are written in the Lamb's Book of Life will get in.
22.1 Then the Angel showed me Water-of-Life River, crystal bright. It flowed from the Throne of God and the Lamb,
22.2 right down the middle of the street. The Tree of Life was planted on each side of the River, producing twelve kinds of fruit, a ripe fruit each month. The leaves of the Tree are for healing the nations.
22.3 Never again will anything be cursed. The Throne of God and of the Lamb is at the center. His servants will offer God service - worshiping,
22.4 they'll look on his face, their foreheads mirroring God.
22.5 Never again will there be any night. No one will need lamplight or sunlight. The shining of God, the Master, is all the light anyone needs. And they will rule with him age after age after age.
22.6 The Angel said to me, "These are dependable and accurate words, every one. The God and Master of the spirits of the prophets sent his Angel to show his servants what must take place, and soon.
22.7 And tell them, 'Yes, I'm on my way!' Blessed be the one who keeps the words of the prophecy of this book."
22.8 I, John, saw all these things with my own eyes, heard them with my ears. Immediately when I heard and saw, I fell on my face to worship at the feet of the Angel who laid it all out before me.
22.9 He objected, "No you don't! I'm a servant just like you and your companions, the prophets, and all who keep the words of this book. Worship God!"
22.10 The Angel continued, "Don't seal the words of the prophecy of this book; don't put it away on the shelf. Time is just about up.
22.11 Let evildoers do their worst and the dirty-minded go all out in pollution, but let the righteous maintain a straight course and the holy continue on in holiness."
22.12 "Yes, I'm on my way! I'll be there soon! I'm bringing my payroll with me. I'll pay all people in full for their life's work.
22.13 I'm A to Z, the First and the Final, Beginning and Conclusion.
22.14 "How blessed are those who wash their robes! The Tree of Life is theirs for good, and they'll walk through the gates to the City.
22.15 But outside for good are the filthy curs: sorcerers, fornicators, murderers, idolaters - all who love and live lies.
22.16 "I, Jesus, sent my Angel to testify to these things for the churches. I'm the Root and Branch of David, the Bright Morning Star."
22.17 "Come!" say the Spirit and the Bride. Whoever hears, echo, "Come!" Is anyone thirsty? Come! All who will, come and drink, Drink freely of the Water of Life!
22.18 I give fair warning to all who hear the words of the prophecy of this book: If you add to the words of this prophecy, God will add to your life the disasters written in this book;
22.19 if you subtract from the words of the book of this prophecy, God will subtract your part from the Tree of Life and the Holy City that are written in this book.
22.20 He who testifies to all these things says it again: "I'm on my way! I'll be there soon!" Yes! Come, Master Jesus!
22.21 The grace of the Master Jesus be with all of you. Oh, Yes!
